\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename bbdb.info
@settitle Insidious Big Brother Database User Manual
@c %**end of header

@c
@c

This is edition 1.9 of the BBDB User Manual for BBDB version 1.51.
This file documents the Insidious Big Brother Database
Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 Jamie Zawinski <jwz@@netscape.com>

Copyright (c) 1991-1994 Jamie Zawinski <jwz@@netscape.com>
Copyright (c) 1997-1998 Matt Simmons <simmonmt@@acm.org>
@end ifinfo
@subtitle A phone number and address database program for GNU Emacs
@subtitle Edition 1.9, Feb 1994
@title BBDB User Manual
@author by Jamie Zawinski
@subtitle Edition $Revision$, $Date$
Copyright @copyright{} 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 Jamie Zawinski <jwz@@netscape.com>
@author by Jamie Zawinski and Matt Simmons

This is edition 1.9 of the @cite{BBDB User Manual} for BBDB version 1.51,
Feb 1994.@refill
@sp 2
This is edition $Revision$ of the @cite{BBDB User Manual} for BBDB
version 1.59unoff, $Date$.@refill

@sp 2

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on fnord all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the author.

@end titlepage
@page

@node Top, Installation,,_
@chapter BBDB

@b{BBDB} is a rolodex-like database program for GNU Emacs.  @b{BBDB} stands 
for @b{@i{Insidious Big Brother Database}}, and is not, repeat, @emph{not} an
obscure reference to the Buck Rogers TV series.

It provides the following features:
Tight integration with mail and news readers, with little or no
@itemize @bullet
@item
Integration with mail and news readers, with little or no
interaction by the user: @refill

@itemize @bullet
@item
easy (or automatic) display of the record corresponding to the sender of
the current message; @refill

@item
automatic creation of records based on the contents of the current
message; @refill

@item
automatic addition of data to arbitrary fields of the record
corresponding to the sender of the current message. @refill
@end itemize

@item
Listing all records which match a regular expression;

@item
Listing all records which match a regular expression in a particular
field (@samp{company} or @samp{notes,} for example); @refill
@end itemize
* Introduction::		Introduction
@menu
* Interfaces::			Interfaces
* Interfaces::			Interfaces to various readers
* The Mailing List::		info-bbdb-request@@xemacs.org
* Internals::                   BBDB Internals
* Todo List::			Todo List
* Changes::                     New in this version
* The Latest Version::		Where to Get It
* The Future::                  Known Bugs and the TODO list
* Thanks::			to the Ministry of Bugs

* Concept Index::		Concept Index
@node Installation, Introduction, Top, Top
@end menu

@node Installation, The BBDB, Top, Top
@section Installation
This program consists of eleven files:

This program consists of several groups of files, organized by
directory:
     bbdb-Makefile - a makefile for compiling this with unix `make'
     bbdb.texinfo  - the source to this documentation
     bbdb.el       - implementation of the database
     bbdb-com.el   - most of the user-level commands
     bbdb-vm.el    - interface to VM (View Mail)
     bbdb-rmail.el - interface to Rmail
     bbdb-gnus.el  - interface to GNUS
     bbdb-mhe.el   - interface to MH-E (Mail Handler)
     bbdb-hooks.el - other optional functionality
     mail-extr.el  - utilities for parsing RFC-822 email addresses
                printing utility
     texinfo  - the documentation files for the @b{BBDB}
     utils    - miscellaneous external utility programs
@end example
@end ifinfo
@item bbdb-Makefile
a makefile for compiling this with unix @code{make}
@item bbdb.texinfo
the source to this documentation
@item bbdb.el
implementation of the database
@item bbdb-com.el
most of the user-level commands
@item bbdb-vm.el
interface to VM (View Mail)
@item bbdb-rmail.el
interface to Rmail
@item bbdb-gnus.el
interface to GNUS
@item bbdb-mhe.el
interface to MH-E (Mail Handler)
@item bbdb-hooks.el
other optional functionality
@item mail-extr.el
utilities for parsing RFC-822 email addresses
the documentation files for the BBDB
@item utils
miscellaneous external utility programs
@end table
Put all of these files in some directory in your @code{load-path},
and byte-compile them.  (If you don't compile these files, the
@b{BBDB} will be so slow as to be virtually unusable.)@refill
File Installation
You can compile everything with the shell command 
Initial Configuration
After setting the paths (if necessary), run one of the following commands:
make -f bbdb-Makefile all 
     @code{make vm}    - Build the core components with @code{VM} support
@end table
@noindent
but that won't work if you don't have @b{VM}.  In that case, you can instead
say @refill
build the @b{BBDB} with support for @code{Gnus} and @code{VM}, you can
make -f bbdb-Makefile rmail vm mhe gnus

@example
@subsection XEmacs Package Installation
(omitting the names of any packages you don't want to bother with).
You will undoubtedly need to change some of the parameters at the
top of the Makefile (see the comments there).@refill
@b{NOTE:} XEmacs packages are currently supported only under XEmacs
Put the following forms in your @file{.emacs} file.
according to the instructions in @ref{Normal User}.
@example
(autoload 'bbdb         "bbdb-com" "Insidious Big Brother Database" t)
(autoload 'bbdb-name    "bbdb-com" "Insidious Big Brother Database" t)
(autoload 'bbdb-company "bbdb-com" "Insidious Big Brother Database" t)
(autoload 'bbdb-net     "bbdb-com" "Insidious Big Brother Database" t)
(autoload 'bbdb-notes   "bbdb-com" "Insidious Big Brother Database" t)
(autoload 'bbdb-insinuate-vm       "bbdb-vm"    "Hook BBDB into VM")
(autoload 'bbdb-insinuate-rmail    "bbdb-rmail" "Hook BBDB into RMAIL")
(autoload 'bbdb-insinuate-mh       "bbdb-mhe"   "Hook BBDB into MH-E")
(autoload 'bbdb-insinuate-gnus     "bbdb-gnus"  "Hook BBDB into GNUS")
(autoload 'bbdb-insinuate-sendmail "bbdb"       "Hook BBDB into sendmail")
@end example

If you want to take advantage of the @b{VM} features of the @b{BBDB},
then add the form @w{@code{(bbdb-insinuate-vm)}} to your @file{~/.vm}
file. @refill

If you want to take advantage of the @b{RMAIL} features of the
@b{BBDB}, then add the following line to your @file{.emacs} file: @refill

@example
(setq rmail-mode-hook 'bbdb-insinuate-rmail)
@end example

If you want to take advantage of the @b{MH-E} features of the
@b{BBDB}, then add the following line to your @file{.emacs} file: @refill
User installation.  See @ref{Normal User}.
To take advantage of the @b{MH-E} features of the @b{BBDB}, add the
(setq mh-folder-mode-hook 'bbdb-insinuate-mh)

@example
If you want to take advantage of the @b{GNUS} features of the @b{BBDB}, then
add one of the following lines to your @file{.emacs} file: @refill
messages are loaded.  This notification is required if the @b{BBDB} is
To take advantage of the @b{RMAIL} features of the @b{BBDB}, add the
(setq gnus-Startup-hook 'bbdb-insinuate-gnus)	; for GNUS 3.14 or older
(setq gnus-startup-hook 'bbdb-insinuate-gnus)	; for GNUS 3.15 or newer

@example
If you want to take advantage of send-mail-mode features of the @b{BBDB}, 
then add the following line to your @file{.emacs} file: @refill
messages are loaded.  This notification is required if the @b{BBDB} is
mail}) features of the @b{BBDB}, add the following form to your Emacs
(setq mail-setup-hook 'bbdb-insinuate-sendmail)

@example
@node Introduction, BBDB Mode, Installation, Top
@section Introduction

The database is a set of records, where each record corresponds to one
person or organization.  Each record has several fields.  The built-in
fields are: @refill
@cindex Builtin fields

@table @b
@item name
The name of this person, or none if it's an organization.
The database itself lives in a file which is named by the variable
@item AKA
A list of other names of this person.

@item company
The name of this person's organization, or none.
types are listed, followed by a description of how and why some types
@item net
A list of this person's network addresses.
@item Type
@item address
A list of postal (physical) addresses for this person.
@tab The name of this person, or none if the record corresponds to an
@item phone
A list of telephone numbers for this person.
@item @code{company}
@item notes
Random commentary.
@end table
@item @code{AKA}
@noindent
In addition to these fields, you may define your own field-types, 
with the @code{bbdb-insert-new-field} command.  (@xref{BBDB Mode}).@refill
@item @code{net}
The database itself lives in a file which is named by the variable
@code{bbdb-file}, defaulting to @file{~/.bbdb}.  The first time you use
one of the @b{BBDB} commands, this file is read into an emacs buffer, and
remains there.  As you make changes to the database, this buffer is
changed as well, ensuring that if it is auto-saved, it will be saved in
its most current state. @refill
@item @code{address}
@node Basic Searching, Advanced Searching, Database Fields, The BBDB
@subsection Basic searching commands

You can list the contents of the database with the command 
@w{@kbd{M-x bbdb}}.  You will be prompted for a regular expression, and all 
records which match that regexp in the name, company, network address,
or any notes fields will be displayed.@refill
@cindex Searching the database
@findex bbdb
@findex bbdb-name
@findex bbdb-company
@findex bbdb-net
@kbd{bbdb-company,} @kbd{bbdb-net,} or @kbd{bbdb-notes} instead,
which limit their searches to the name, company, email address, and
notes fields, respectively.  If these commands are given a prefix
argument, the listing displayed will be one line per entry; otherwise,
the full db entry will be shown on multiple lines.@refill
fields, respectively.  If these commands are given a prefix argument,
the listing displayed will be one line per entry; otherwise, the full
database entry will be shown on multiple lines.@refill
(@key{RET} for all).  In this way you can limit your searches to the
@cindex User-defined fields
The @code{bbdb-notes} command will prompt for the notes field to search
(@kbd{RET} for all).  In this way you can limit your searches to the
contents of one particular user-defined notes field.  (You can add 
user-defined fields with the @code{bbdb-insert-new-field} command;
@xref{BBDB Mode}.)@refill

@node Manual Record Addition,  , Advanced Searching, The BBDB
@subsection Manual record addition

There are several ways to add new entries to the Insidious Big Brother 
Database; the most straightforward is to use @w{@kbd{M-x bbdb-create}},
which will prompt you for all relevant information.  However, the
easiest way is to allow them to be added automatically by one of the
mail or news-reading interfaces (@xref{Interfaces}). @refill

@node BBDB Mode, Interfaces, Introduction, Top
@cindex Adding new records

The @samp{*BBDB*} buffer is in @b{BBDB mode,} which has keybindings for
manipulating the database.  Letters no longer insert themselves.
Numbers are prefix arguments.  You can move around using the usual
cursor motion commands. @refill
the key(s) corresponding to the desired command.  The output (if any) of
the listed commands will be displayed in the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer, and
can be navigated through using the usual cursor motion commands.
@cindex BBDB Mode
@cindex *BBDB* buffer

@table @kbd
@item e
@findex bbdb-edit-current-field
@cindex Editing fields
@cindex Changing fields
(@code{bbdb-edit-current-field})  Edit the field on the current line.  If
the cursor is in the middle of a multi-line field, such as an address or
comments section, then the entire field is edited, not just the current
line. @refill

@item ;
@findex bbdb-edit-notes
(@code{bbdb-edit-notes})  A shortcut for editing the @var{notes} field. @refill

@item d, C-k
(@code{bbdb-delete-current-field-or-record}) Delete the field on the current
line.  If the current line is the first line of a record, then this
deletes the entire record from the database (prompting first). @refill
current line.  If the current line is the first line of a record, the
@b{BBDB} will, after prompting the user, delete the entire record from
the database.

@item C-o
@findex bbdb-insert-new-field
(@code{bbdb-insert-new-field}) Inserts a new field into the current record, 
as opposed to editing an existing one.  You are prompted (with
completion) for the type of field to insert (@b{phone}, @b{address},
@b{notes}, etc); if the string you type is not a known field type, you
will be asked whether to add a new ``note'' field of that type.@refill
insert (@b{phone}, @b{address}, @b{notes}, etc); if the string you type
is not a known field type, you will be asked whether to add a new field
with the entered name of type @code{notes}.

@cindex Phone numbers
@cindex North American phone numbers
@cindex European phone numbers
If you are inserting a new phone-number field, you can control whether
number.  Otherwise, which style is used is controlled by the variable
@code{bbdb-north-american-phone-numbers-p}. @refill
any other prefix arg means it's to be a a structured North American
number.  If no prefix argument is supplied, the style used is controlled
by the variable @code{bbdb-north-american-phone-numbers-p}. @refill

@item C-x C-t
@findex bbdb-transpose-fields
@cindex Reordering fields
@cindex Transposing fields
(@code{bbdb-transpose-fields}) This is like the @code{transpose-lines} 
command, but it is for @b{BBDB} fields.  If the cursor is on a field of
With argument @var{ARG}, takes previous line and moves it past @var{ARG}
fields.  With argument 0, interchanges the field that @i{point} is in with
the field that @i{mark} is in.@refill
With non-zero numeric argument @var{ARG}, the previous field is moved
past @var{ARG} fields.  With argument 0, the field indicated by
@i{point} is interchanged with the one indicated by @i{mark}.

Both fields must be in the same record, and must be of the same basic type
(that is, you can use this command to change the order in which phone-number
fields are listed, but you can't use it to make an address appear before a
phone number; the order of field types is fixed.)@refill

@item n, p
@findex bbdb-next-record
@findex bbdb-prev-record
(@code{bbdb-next-record}, @code{bbdb-prev-record})  Move to the next and
previous displayed record, respectively. @refill

@item t
@findex bbdb-elide-record
(@code{bbdb-elide-record}) Toggles whether the current record is displayed
in a one-line listing, or a full multi-line listing.  With a numeric argument
of 0, the current record will unconditionally be made elided; with any
other argument, the current record will unconditionally be shown
expanded. @refill

If @kbd{*t} is used instead of simply @kbd{t}, then the state of all
records will be changed instead of just the one at point.  In this case,
a numeric argument of 0 means that all records will unconditionally be
made elided; any other numeric argument means that all of the records
will unconditionally be shown expanded; and no numeric argument means
that the records are made to be in the opposite state of the record
under point. @refill

@item o
@findex bbdb-omit-record
(@code{bbdb-omit-record}) Removes the current record from the display,
but does not delete it from the database; it merely makes it seem as if
the most recent search had not matched this record.  With a numeric
argument, omit the next N records.  With a negative argument, go
backwards. @refill

@item m
(@code{bbdb-send-mail})  Begin composing mail to the person represented
@cindex Sending mail
@vindex bbdb-send-mail-style
(@code{bbdb-send-mail}) Begin composing mail to the person represented
will be used; if @b{VM} is loaded, then @code{vm-mail} is used;
otherwise, @code{mail} is used.  You can override this by setting the
variable @code{bbdb-send-mail-style} to one of the symbols @code{vm}, 
@code{mh}, or @code{mail}. @refill
You can override this by setting the variable
@code{bbdb-send-mail-style} to one of the symbols @code{vm}, @code{mh},
@code{message}, or @code{mail}. @refill

If @kbd{*m} is used instead of simply @kbd{m}, then mail will be sent to
@code{compose-mail} and @code{mail-user-agent}.  In a future version of
the @b{BBDB}, it will.

@item s, C-x C-s
@findex bbdb-save-db
@cindex Saving your changes
(@code{bbdb-save-db})  Saves the @b{BBDB} file to disk.

@item r
@findex bbdb-refile-record
@cindex Fixing mistakes
@cindex Merging records
(@code{bbdb-refile-record})  Merge the current record into some other record;
that is, delete the record under point after copying all of the data
within it into some other record.  this is useful if you realize that
somehow a redundant record has gotten into the database, and you want to
merge it with another. @refill

If both records have names and/or companies, you are asked which to use.
Phone numbers, addresses, and network addresses are simply concatenated.
The first record is the record under the point; the second is prompted 
for.  Completion behavior is as dictated by the variable
@code{bbdb-completion-type}. @refill

@item M-d
(@code{bbdb-dial}) If you are on a Sun SparcStation with the
@samp{sound} option installed, this command will play the
appropriate tones on the builtin speaker to dial the phone number
corresponding to the current line.  If the point is at the beginning
of a record, dial the first phone number.  This does not dial the
extension.  This also does not dial the area code if it is the same as
@code{bbdb-default-area-code}, unless a prefix argument is given. @refill
This does not dial the extension.  This also does not dial the area code
the first element of @code{bbdb-sound-files} for the digit @samp{0}, the 
second for @samp{1}, the third for @samp{2}, and so on.

@table @code
@item bbdb-dial-local-prefix
@vindex bbdb-dial-local-prefix
Set this to a string of digits if your phone system requires you to dial
some code to access an outside line.@refill

@item bbdb-dial-long-distance-prefix
@vindex bbdb-dial-long-distance-prefix
Set this to a string of digits if your phone system requires you to dial
some code before dialing a long-distance number (one not in your local 
area code.)@refill
@end table

(@code{bbdb-finger})  This command ``fingers'' the network address of a
@findex bbdb-finger
@cindex Finger interface
(@code{bbdb-finger})  This command fingers the network address of a
@b{BBDB} record.  If this command is executed from the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer,
it fingers the network address of the record which is at point; otherwise, 
it prompts in the minibuffer (with completion) for a user to finger.  With a
numeric prefix argument, it fingers the @i{N}th network address of the 
current record; with a prefix argument of @kbd{^U}, it fingers all of them.
The @samp{*finger*} buffer is filled asynchronously, meaning that you don't
have to wait around for it to finish; but fingering another user before
the first finger has finished could have unpredictable results.@refill

If this command is executed from the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer, it may be prefixed
with @kbd{*} (as in @kbd{*f} instead of simply @kbd{f}), meaning to
@code{finger-host}.  The name of the field to be fingered can be changed 
by setting @code{bbdb-finger-host-field}.
(@code{bbdb-bury-buffer})  Gets the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer out of your face.
@findex bbdb-bury-buffer
(@code{bbdb-bury-buffer})  Hides the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer.  @b{Note:}
This command does @b{not} kill the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer.

@item ?
@findex bbdb-help
(@code{bbdb-help})  This displays a one-line help message in the
minibuffer, showing some of the most common bbdb-mode commands.
(@code{bbdb-info})  This jumps from the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer to this
documentation.  If this documentation is installed in the standard place
(the directory named by the variable @code{Info-directory}) in a file
called @file{bbdb} or @file{bbdb.info}, then no further configuration is
necessary to make this work.@refill
(@code{bbdb-info})  This documentation is displayed.  Please note that
either @file{bbdb} or @file{bbdb.info} must be installed in one of the
info directories known to Emacs for this command to work.

@table @code
@item bbdb-info-file
@vindex bbdb-info-file
If this documentation is not installed in the standard Info directory,
then you should set this variable to the name of the texinfo-formatted 
(@code{bbdb-print})  Creates a TeX file that contains a pretty-printed version 
of @b{BBDB} records.  If prefixed by @kbd{*}, only the records currently
@node Interfaces, Options, BBDB Mode, Top
@end table

@node Interfaces, Reader-specific Features, BBDB Mode, Top
@section Interfaces

The @b{BBDB} interfaces itself with several message-handling packages, but
certain parameters control its behavior depending on whether it is
being used from within a mail reader or a news reader. @refill

In all of these packages, two new keybindings will be added:

@table @kbd
@item :
@cindex Showing the sender of the current message
@findex bbdb/vm-show-sender
(show-sender)  Displays the @b{BBDB} entry corresponding to the author of the
current message.  If there is none, you will be asked whether to create
one. @refill
@code{bbdb/@i{package}-show-sender}, where @code{@i{package}} is either
@code{gnus}, @code{mh}, @code{rmail}, or @code{vm}, depending on the
mail or news program being used when the command is invoked. 

@item ;
@cindex Annotating the sender of the current message
@findex bbdb/vm-annotate-sender
(annotate-sender)  Lets you edit the @samp{notes} field of the @b{BBDB} record
corresponding to the sender of the current message.  If there is no
record for the current author, you will be asked whether to create one.@refill 
@code{bbdb/@i{package}-annotate-sender}, where @code{@i{package}} is
either @code{gnus}, @code{mh}, @code{rmail}, or @code{vm}, depending on
available unless you call the appropriate ``insinuation''
function; @xref{Installation}.@refill

It is possible to configure @b{BBDB} so that it automatically creates a
record when it sees a message from a person who is not in the database.
It is also possible to have text automatically added to the notes field
These keybindings (and several other features) will not be 
available unless you call the appropriate ``insinuation''
function; @xref{Installation}.@refill

of the corresponding record depending on the contents of the message
headers.  @xref{Customization Hooks} @refill

@menu
* Mail Reading Interfaces::		Mail Reading Interfaces
* News Reading Interfaces::		News Reading Interfaces
* Mail Sending Interfaces::		Mail Sending Interfaces
@end menu

@node Mail Reading Interfaces, News Reading Interfaces, Interfaces, Interfaces
@subsection Mail Reading Interfaces

There are BBDB interfaces for the following mail readers:
@b{RMAIL}, from the standard emacs library;
@item
@b{MH-E}, the Emacs interface to @b{Mail Handler}, from the standard 
emacs library.@refill
@b{MH-E}, the Emacs interface to @b{Mail Handler} (@b{MH}), from the
@b{RMAIL}, from the standard emacs library (packaged separately for
XEmacs users as of 20.4);
@item
@b{View Mail}, by Kyle Jones, version 5.31 or newer;
@end itemize

The only news reader which @b{BBDB} supports is @b{GNUS}, by
Masanobu Umeda.  If anyone wants to write a @b{BBDB} interface to
@b{GNEWS} (probably quite easy to do), please send it to me. @refill
@subsection News Reading Interfaces
@node Mail Sending Interfaces,, News Reading Interfaces, Interfaces
@end itemize

@node Mail Sending Interfaces,  , News Reading Interfaces, Interfaces
@subsection Mail Sending Interfaces

@findex bbdb-complete-name
@cindex Name completion
@cindex Mail address completion
@cindex Address completion
When sending mail, the keystroke @kbd{M-TAB} is bound to the
function @code{bbdb-complete-name}.  This will take the string that
you have typed (from point back to the preceding colon, comma, or
the beginning of the line) and will complete that against the
with the common portion of the matches.  Typing @kbd{M-@key{TAB}} again will
subsequence of a person's full name or network address; if it
completes ambiguously, then what you have typed will be replaced
with the common portion of the matches.  Typing @kbd{M-TAB} again will
show a list of possible completions.  If it completes unambiguously,
then an address of the form @w{@code{User Name <email-address>}} will
be inserted.  The variable @code{bbdb-completion-type} controls
You must call the function @code{bbdb-insinuate-sendmail} to get
this key binding.  @xref{Installation}@refill
This binding is automatically set by the various insinuation functions
The above forms should be added to your Emacs initialization file,
@code{mail-alias} property: if a record has a @code{mail-alias}
property, then that is used instead of their @code{name} field.
You can control what ``real name'' is inserted with the
@code{mail-alias} field: if a record has a @code{mail-alias}
field, then that is used instead of their @code{name} field.

@vindex bbdb-completion-display-record
If the variable @code{bbdb-completion-display-record} is true (the
default) then when you successfully complete an address with
@kbd{M-TAB}, the corresponding record will be appended to
the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer.  The buffer will not be displayed if it
is not already visible, but the record will be displayed there.

@findex bbdb-yank-addresses
@cindex Sending mail
When sending mail, you can use the command @code{bbdb-yank-addresses} 
to CC the current message to the people currently displayed in 
the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer.  This is useful if you are in the midst of
sending or replying to a message, and you decide to add some recipients.
You can use one of the @kbd{M-x bbdb} commands to display the set of
people that you want to CC the message to, and then execute this command
to add them to the list.

@cindex Mailing lists
@cindex Mail Aliases
If you are using my @file{mail-abbrevs.el} package, which uses the
word-abbrev mechanism for mail aliases, then you can store your mail
aliases in the BBDB instead of duplicating the information elsewhere.@refill
uses the word-abbrev mechanism for mail aliases, then you can store your
If you want a mail alias to be defined for a person, simply add 
a @code{mail-alias} field to their record.  You may have multiple
aliases for the same person; simply separate them with commas.@refill
If you want a mail alias to be defined for a person, simply add a
If more than one person has the same mail-alias, then that alias 
expands to the addresses of all of those people; in this way you can
maintain mailing lists within the BBDB.@refill
If more than one person has the same mail-alias, then that alias expands
to the addresses of all of those people; in this way you can maintain
function @code{bbdb-define-all-aliases} from your @code{mail-setup-hook}.
This will search the database, and call @code{define-mail-alias} to
define each of the resulting aliases.@refill
function @code{bbdb-define-all-aliases} from your
@node Options, The Mailing List, Interfaces, Top
currently being displayed in W3 to a user-specified @b{BBDB} record.

@node Options, Utilities, Other Packages, Top
@section Options

There are many variables which control the behavior of the Insidious Big 
Brother Database, and there are many hook-variables which can be used to
modify its behavior in more complex ways.  Several pieces of functionality
are included which use the hooks in this way. @refill

@menu
* Customization Parameters::	Customization Parameters
* Customization Hooks::		Customization Hooks
* Predefined Hooks::		Predefined Hooks
@end menu

@node Customization Parameters, Customization Hooks, Options, Options
@subsection Customization Parameters

@table @code
@item bbdb-file
@vindex bbdb-file
The name of the file which contains your personal database.  Default:
@file{~/.bbdb}.

@item bbdb-default-area-code
@vindex bbdb-default-area-code
@cindex Phone numbers
The default area code to use when prompting for a new phone number.
Default: 415.  This must be a number, not a string.@refill

@item bbdb-north-american-phone-numbers-p
@vindex bbdb-north-american-phone-numbers-p
@cindex North American phone numbers
@cindex European phone numbers
Whether syntax-checking of phone numbers should be enforced.  Default:
@code{t}.  This only works for Bell-system phone numbers.  If this is true,
then you can't enter invalid phone numbers, and all phone numbers are
pretty-printed in the same way.  European phone numbers don't have as
strict a syntax, however, so this is a harder problem for them (on which
I am punting). @refill

You can have both styles of phone number in your database by providing a
prefix argument to the @code{bbdb-insert-new-field} command. @refill

@item bbdb-electric-p
@vindex bbdb-electric-p
@cindex Electric display
Whether bbdb mode should be @i{``electric''} like @code{electric-buffer-list}.
Default: @code{t}.  Basically this means that when you type space after 
@w{@kbd{M-x bbdb}}, your window configuration will be restored to what it was
before you invoked the db list.  (The @code{bbdb-mode} commands still work as 
well.) @refill

There are some problems with electric modes; for example, keyboard
macros and incremental search don't work.  (This is not a bug in BBDB,
but in @file{electric.el}.)@refill

@item bbdb-case-fold-search
@vindex bbdb-case-fold-search
Default: the same as @code{case-fold-search}.  @code{case-fold-search} is 
bound to this by @w{@kbd{M-x bbdb}} and related commands.  This variable lets
the case-sensitivity of @kbd{^S} and of the bbdb searching commands be
different.

@item bbdb/mail-auto-create-p
@vindex bbdb/mail-auto-create-p
If this is @code{t} (the default), then @b{VM}, @b{MH}, and @b{RMAIL}
will automatically create new bbdb records for people you receive mail
from.  If this variable is a function name or lambda expression, then it
is called with no arguments to decide whether an entry should be
automatically created.  You can use this to, for example, not create
records for messages which have reached you through a particular mailing
list, or to only create records automatically if the mail has a
particular subject.  See the variables
@code{bbdb-ignore-most-messages-alist} and
@code{bbdb-ignore-some-messages-alist} (@xref{Predefined Hooks}) @refill

@item bbdb/news-auto-create-p
@vindex bbdb/news-auto-create-p
@cindex Automatically creating records
If this is @code{t} (default: @code{nil}), then @b{GNUS} will
automatically create new @b{BBDB} records for people you read messages
by.  If this is a function name or lambda expression, then it is called
with no arguments to decide whether an entry should be automatically
created.  You can use this to, for example, create or not create
messages which have a particular subject.  See the variable
@code{bbdb-auto-notes-alist} (@xref{Predefined Hooks}). @refill

If you want to autocreate messages based on the current newsgroup, it's
probably a better idea to set this variable to @code{t} or @code{nil} from your
@code{gnus-select-group-hook} instead. @refill
@example
(setq gnus-select-group-hook
  '(lambda ()
     (setq bbdb/news-auto-create-p
           (or (string= "some.news.group" gnus-newsgroup-name)
               (string= "other.news.group" gnus-newsgroup-name)))))
@end example
@exdent            (or (string= "some.news.group" gnus-newsgroup-name)
@exdent                (string= "other.news.group" gnus-newsgroup-name)))))
@end example

@item bbdb-quiet-about-name-mismatches
@vindex bbdb-quiet-about-name-mismatches
If this is false (the default), then @b{BBDB} will prompt you when it notices a
name change, that is, when the ``real name'' in a message doesn't correspond
to a record already in the database with the same network address.  As in,
@w{@i{``John Smith <jqs@@frob.com>''}} versus
@w{@i{``John Q. Smith <jqs@@frob.com>''.}}  If this is true, then you will
not be asked if you want to change it (and it will not be changed.) @refill

@item bbdb-use-alternate-names
@vindex bbdb-use-alternate-names
@cindex Alternate names
@cindex AKA
If this is false, then the @b{BBDB} will not use the @b{AKA} field.
Otherwise (the default) then the mail and news interfaces will ask you
if you want to add an alternate name when a name-change is noticed, and
will ask you whether the new name should be made the primary one.
Note that if @code{bbdb-quiet-about-name-mismatches} is true, you will
not be asked any questions about alternate names.

@item bbdb-readonly-p
@vindex bbdb-readonly-p
If this is true (default: @code{nil}), then nothing will attempt to change the
database implicitly, and you will be prevented from doing it
explicitly.  If you have more than one emacs running at the same time,
you might want to arrange for this to be set to @code{t} in all but one of
them. @refill

@item bbdb-auto-revert-p
@vindex bbdb-auto-revert-p
If this variable is true (default: @code{nil}) and the @b{BBDB} file is noticed to
have changed on disk, it will be automatically reverted without
prompting you first.  Otherwise you will be asked.  (But if the file has
changed and you have made changes in memory as well, you will always be
asked.) @refill

@item bbdb-notice-auto-save-file
@vindex bbdb-notice-auto-save-file
@cindex Auto-save files
If this is true (default: @code{nil}), then the @b{BBDB} will notice when its
auto-save file is newer than the file is was read from, and will offer
to revert. @refill

@item bbdb-use-pop-up
@vindex bbdb-use-pop-up
@cindex Automatic display of the corresponding record
If true (the default), display a continuously-updating @b{BBDB}
window while in @b{VM}, @b{MH}, @b{RMAIL}, or @b{GNUS}.
Each time a new message is selected, the record corresponding to
that message's sender will be displayed in another window.  The
buffer in this other window will be in bbdb-mode, and all
corresponding commands will be available. @refill

This buffer will be positioned on the screen by finding the tallest
of the windows present, and splitting it such that the bottom
@code{bbdb-pop-up-target-lines} lines of the window display the
@samp{*BBDB*} buffer.  With the default configurations of @b{VM},
@b{MH}, @b{RMAIL}, and @b{GNUS}, this means that the bbdb-list
buffer will be just below the message-body buffer. @refill

If this is the symbol @code{horiz}, then the @b{BBDB} window will be
stacked horizontally instead of vertically, if there is room to do that
tastefully. @refill

@item bbdb-pop-up-target-lines
@vindex bbdb-pop-up-target-lines
Desired number of lines in a @b{VM/MH/RMAIL/GNUS} pop-up @b{BBDB} window,
default 5. @refill

@item bbdb-completion-type
@vindex bbdb-completion-type
@cindex Completion
@cindex Name completion
@cindex Mail address completion
@cindex Address completion
Controls the behavior of the @code{bbdb-complete-name} command.  If @code{nil}
(the default), completion is done across the set of all full-names and
user-ids in the database; if the symbol @code{name}, completion is
done on real-names only; if the symbol @code{net}, completion is done
on network addresses only; if it is @code{primary}, then completion is
done only across the set of primary network addresses (the first address
in the list of addresses for a given user).  If it is
@code{primary-or-name}, completion is done across primaries and real
names. @refill

@item bbdb-user-mail-names
@vindex bbdb-user-mail-names
A regular expression identifying the addresses that belong to you.  If a
message from an address matching this is seen, the @b{BBDB} record for the
@samp{To:} line will be shown instead of the one for the @samp{From:}
line.  If this is @code{nil}, it will default to the value of
@code{(user-login-name)}. @refill

@item bbdb-always-add-addresses
@vindex bbdb-always-add-addresses
If this is @code{t}, then whenever the Insidious Big Brother Database
notices a new email address corresponding to a person who is in the
database, it will add it to the database.  If this is @code{nil} (the
default), then whenever a new network address is noticed for a person in
the database, you will be asked whether to add the address.  If this is
the symbol @code{never} (really if it is not @code{t} and not @code{nil})
then new network addresses will never be automatically added. @refill

@item bbdb-new-nets-always-primary
@vindex bbdb-new-nets-always-primary
If this is @code{t}, then when the Insidious Big Brother Database adds a new
address to a record, it will always add it to the front of the list of
addresses, making it the primary address.  If this is @code{nil} (the default),
then you will be asked.  If this is the symbol @code{never} (really if
it is not @code{t} and not @code{nil}) then new network addresses will
always be added to the end of the list. @refill

@item bbdb-canonicalize-redundant-nets-p
@vindex bbdb-canonicalize-redundant-nets-p
If this is non-@code{nil}, redundant network addresses will be ignored.
If a record has an address of the form @code{foo@@baz.com}, setting this
to @code{t} will cause subsequently-noticed addresses 
like @code{foo@@bar.baz.com} to be ignored (since we already have a more
general form of that address.)  This is similar in function to one of
the possible uses of the variable @code{bbdb-canonicalize-net-hook}
but is somewhat more automatic.  (This can't quite be implemented in
terms of the canonicalize-net-hook because it needs access to the
database to determine whether an address is redundant, and the
canonicalize-net-hook is purely a textual manipulation which is
performed before any database access.)

@item bbdb-message-caching-enabled
@vindex bbdb-message-caching-enabled
Whether caching of the message->bbdb-record association should be
used for the interfaces which support it (@b{VM}, @b{MH}, and
@b{RMAIL}).  This can speed things up a lot.  One implication of
this variable being true (the default) is that the
@code{bbdb-notice-hook} will not be called each time a message is
selected, but only the first time.  Likewise, if selecting a message
would generate a question (whether to add an address, change the
name, etc) you will only be asked that question the very first time
the message is selected. @refill

@item bbdb-elided-display
@vindex bbdb-elided-display
Default: @code{nil}.  Set this to @code{t} to make the bbdb-display commands
default to displaying one line per record instead of a full listing.
Set this to a list of some of the symbols @code{'(address phone net
notes)} to select those fields to be left out of the listing (you can't
leave out the name field). @refill

This is the default state for @w{@kbd{M-x bbdb}} and friends.  You can have a
different default for when the @b{BBDB} buffer is automatically updated by the
mail and news interfaces by setting the variable
@code{bbdb-pop-up-elided-display}.  If that variable is unbound, this
variable will be consulted instead.@refill

@item bbdb-pop-up-elided-display
@vindex bbdb-pop-up-elided-display
Default: unbound.  Set this to @code{t} if to make the pop-up @b{BBDB} buffer
default to displaying one line per record instead of a full listing.
Set this to a list of some of the symbols @code{'(address phone net
notes)} to select those fields to be left out of the listing (you can't
leave out the name field). @refill

The default state for @w{@kbd{M-x bbdb}} and friends is controlled by the
variable @code{bbdb-elided-display}; this variable is the default for
when the @b{BBDB} buffer is automatically updated by the mail and news
interfaces.  If bbdb-pop-up-elided-display is unbound, then
bbdb-elided-display the former will be consulted instead by mail and
news.@refill

@item bbdb-offer-save
@vindex bbdb-offer-save
If @code{t} (the default), then certain actions will cause the @b{BBDB} to
ask you whether you wish to save the database.  If @code{nil}, then the
offer to save will never be made.  If not @code{t} and not @code{nil}, then
any time it would ask you, it will just save it without asking. @refill
The following variables apply only to the @b{GNUS} interface to @b{BBDB}.  To
make use of them, you must add this forms to your @file{.emacs} file:@refill

@example
(autoload 'bbdb/gnus-lines-and-from "bbdb-gnus")
(setq gnus-optional-headers 'bbdb/gnus-lines-and-from)
@end example

@table @code
@item bbdb/gnus-mark-known-posters
@vindex bbdb/gnus-mark-known-posters
@cindex GNUS Subject-buffer
If @code{t} (the default), then the @b{GNUS} subject list will contain an
indication of those messages posted by people who have entries in
the Insidious Big Brother Database (they will be marked with an
asterisk.) @refill

@cindex mark-char
You can change the character used to mark records on a record-by-record
basis by adding a @code{mark-char} property to the record, whose value 
is be the string to display (preferably one character.) @refill

@item bbdb/gnus-header-prefer-real-names
@vindex bbdb/gnus-header-prefer-real-names
Default: @code{nil}.  if @code{t}, then the @b{GNUS} subject list will
display real names instead of network addresses. @refill

@item bbdb/gnus-header-show-bbdb-names
@vindex bbdb/gnus-header-show-bbdb-names
Default: @code{t}.  If both this variable and 
the @code{bbdb/gnus-header-prefer-real-names} variable are true, then
for news messages from people who are in your database, the name displayed 
will be the primary name from the database, rather than the one from
the @samp{From:} line of the message.  This doesn't affect the names of
people who aren't in the database, of course.@refill

@item bbdb/gnus-lines-and-from-length
@vindex bbdb/gnus-lines-and-from-length
Default: 18.  The number of characters used to display @samp{From:} info in
@b{GNUS}, if you have set @code{gnus-optional-headers} to
@code{bbdb/gnus-lines-and-from}. @refill
@end table


@end table

@node Customization Hooks, Predefined Hooks, Customization Parameters, Options
@subsection Customization Hooks

All of the hooks variables described below may be set to a symbol or
lambda expression, which will be funcalled; or may be set to a list of
symbols or lambda expressions, each of which will be funcalled in turn.
Almost all hooks in Emacs work this way.  But notice that some of the
hooks described below are called with arguments.

@table @code
@item bbdb-list-hook
@vindex bbdb-list-hook
Hook or hooks invoked after the bbdb-list-buffer is filled in.  Invoked
with no arguments. @refill

@item bbdb-create-hook
@vindex bbdb-create-hook
Hook or hooks invoked each time a new bbdb-record is created.  Invoked
with one argument, the new record.  This is called @emph{before} the record is 
added to the database.  Note that @code{bbdb-change-hook} will be called as
well. @refill

@item bbdb-change-hook
@vindex bbdb-change-hook
Hook or hooks invoked each time a bbdb-record is altered.  Invoked with
one argument, the record.  This is called @emph{before} the database buffer
is modified.  Note that if a new bbdb record is created, both this hook and
@code{bbdb-create-hook} will be called. @refill

@item bbdb-mode-hook
@vindex bbdb-mode-hook
Hook or hooks invoked when the @samp{*BBDB*} buffer is created.

@item bbdb-notice-hook
@vindex bbdb-notice-hook
Hook or hooks invoked each time a bbdb-record is ``noticed,'' that
is, each time it is displayed by the news or mail interfaces.
Invoked with one argument, the new record.  The record need not have
been modified for this to be called - use @code{bbdb-change-hook} for that.
You can use this to, for example, add something to the notes field
based on the subject of the current message.  It is up to your hook
Also note that @code{bbdb-change-hook} will @emph{not} be called as a result of any
modifications you may make to the record inside this hook. @refill
Also note that @code{bbdb-change-hook} will @emph{not} be called as a
result of any modifications you may make to the record inside this
hook. @refill

Beware that if the variable @code{bbdb-message-caching-enabled} is
true (a good idea) then when you are using @b{VM}, @b{MH}, or
@b{RMAIL}, this hook will be called only the first time that
message is selected.  (The @b{GNUS} interface does not use caching.)
When debugging the value of this hook, it is a good idea to set
caching-enabled to @code{nil}. @refill

@item bbdb-after-read-db-hook
@vindex bbdb-after-read-db-hook
Hook or hooks invoked (with no arguments) just after the Insidious Big 
@example
(setq bbdb-after-read-db-hook '(lambda () (rename-buffer " bbdb")))
@end example

@code{(setq bbdb-after-read-db-hook '(lambda () (rename-buffer " bbdb")))}

@noindent
will cause the buffer visiting the @code{bbdb-file} to be
called @w{@code{" bbdb"}}.  The leading space in its name will prevent
it from showing up in the buffer list.

@item bbdb-load-hook
@vindex bbdb-load-hook
Hook or hooks invoked (with no arguments) when the Insidious Big Brother 
Database code is first loaded. @refill

@item bbdb-canonicalize-net-hook
@vindex bbdb-canonicalize-net-hook
If this is non-@code{nil}, it should be a function of one argument: a
network address string.  (Note that, unlike the other hook-variables
described above, this may not be a list of functions.)  Whenever the
Insidious Big Brother Database ``notices'' a message, the corresponding
network address will be passed to this function first, as a kind of
``filter'' to do whatever transformations upon it you like before it is
compared against or added to the database.  For example: it is the case
that @code{CS.CMU.EDU} is a valid return address for all mail
originating at a machine in the @code{.CS.CMU.EDU} domain.  So, if you
wanted all such addresses to be canonically hashed as
@code{user@@CS.CMU.EDU}, instead of as @code{user@@somehost.CS.CMU.EDU},
you might set this variable to a function like this: @refill

@example
(setq bbdb-canonicalize-net-hook
     '(lambda (addr)
        (cond ((string-match
                 "\\`\\([^@@]+@@\\).*\\.\\(CS\\.CMU\\.EDU\\)\\'"
                 addr)
               (concat (substring addr
                         (match-beginning 1) (match-end 1))
                       (substring addr
                         (match-beginning 2) (match-end 2))))
              (t addr))))
@end example

You could also use this function to rewrite UUCP-style addresses into
domain-style addresses, or any number of other things.@refill

This function will be called repeatedly until it returns a value EQ to the
value passed in.  So multiple rewrite rules might apply to a single
address.@refill

There is an example of the use of this variable in the 
file @file{bbdb-hooks.el}: the function
@code{sample-bbdb-canonicalize-net-hook}.@refill
@end table

@vindex bbdb-change-hook
@findex bbdb-delete-redundant-nets
The @code{bbdb-canonicalize-net-hook} is powerful in that it allows
arbitrary rewriting of addresses, however, in many cases that is
overkill.  The function @code{bbdb-delete-redundant-nets} can be
used as a value of @code{bbdb-change-hook} to cause network addresses
which appear to be ``redundant'' to be deleted each time a modification
is made to a record. @refill

This works as follows: suppose one gets mail from @code{user@@foo.bar.com},
and then later gets mail from @code{user@@bar.com}.  At this point, one 
can generally delete the @code{user@@foo.bar.com} address, since the 
@code{user@@bar.com} address is more general.  (See also the 
variable `bbdb-canonicalize-redundant-nets-p', which has the effect of
@vindex vm-summary-format
@findex vm-summary-function-B
@cindex %F
@cindex %UB
VM users can cause their summary buffer to display the name of the
message sender according to BBDB data, instead of according to the
contents of the current message's headers.  In VM 5.40 or later, use
the summary format control @code{%UB"} instead of @code{"%F"}, and the
current record name will be shown there if available.  If no entry is
found it behaves like @code{"%F"}.  See the documentation for
@code{vm-summary-format} for more details.  Warning, this may
significantly slow down summary generation for large folders.


@node Predefined Hooks,, Customization Hooks, Options
address @code{user@@bar.com} is already known.)@refill

@node Predefined Hooks,  , Customization Hooks, Options
@subsection Predefined Hooks

@code{bbdb-timestamp-hook}, then every record in the database will have
a field named @samp{timestamp}, which will always contain the date and time
at which this record was created or last modified. @refill
database will have a field named @samp{timestamp}, which will always
contain the date and time at which this record was created or last
modified.
@code{bbdb-creation-date-hook}, then every record in the database will have
a field named @samp{creation-date}, which will contain the date and time
at which this record was added to the database. @refill
database will have a field named @samp{creation-date}, which will
contain the date and time at which this record was added to the
database.

@findex bbdb-ignore-most-messages-hook
@vindex bbdb-ignore-most-messages-alist
@cindex Automatically creating records
If the variable @code{bbdb/mail-auto-create-p} is set to the symbol 
@code{bbdb-ignore-most-messages-hook}, then the variable 
@code{bbdb-ignore-most-messages-alist} will determine which messages
should have records automatically created for them.  The format of this
alist is @refill
@example
(( @var{HEADER-NAME} . @var{REGEXP} ) @dots{} )
@end example
@noindent
for example,
@example
(("From" . "@@.*\\.maximegalon\\.edu")
 ("Subject" . "time travel"))
@end example

@noindent
will cause @b{BBDB} entries to be made only for messages sent by
people at Maximegalon U., or (that's @emph{or}) people posting
about time travel. @refill

There may be only one entry per header in this alist: that is, @refill

@example
(("From" . "addr1\\|addr2") @dots{} )
@end example

@noindent
is legal, but

@example
(("From" . "addr1") ("From" . "addr2") @dots{} )
@end example

@noindent
is not.

@vindex bbdb/mail-auto-create-p
@vindex bbdb/news-auto-create-p
@findex bbdb-ignore-some-messages-hook
@vindex bbdb-ignore-some-messages-alist
If the variable @code{bbdb/mail-auto-create-p} is set to the symbol 
@code{bbdb-ignore-some-messages-hook}, then the variable 
@code{bbdb-ignore-some-messages-alist} will determine which messages
should have records automatically created for them.  This is the exact
inverse of the semantics of the @code{bbdb-ignore-most-messages-alist}:
the alist specifies which messages should @emph{not} have records 
automatically created for them, instead of which should.  For 
example, @refill

@example
(("From" . "mailer.daemon")
 ("To" . "mailing-list-1\\|mailing-list-2")
 ("CC" . "mailing-list-1\\|mailing-list-2"))
@end example

@noindent
will cause @b{BBDB} entries to not be made for messages from any mailer daemon,
or messages sent to or @b{CC}ed to either of two mailing lists. @refill

The variable @code{bbdb/news-auto-create-p} may be set to either of the 
above-mentioned functions as well, to get this behavior for netnews 
messages instead of mail messages.@refill

@vindex bbdb-notice-hook
@vindex bbdb-auto-notes-alist
@cindex Automatically adding text to records
If the variable @code{bbdb-notice-hook} is set to the symbol 
@code{bbdb-auto-notes-hook}, then the variable @code{bbdb-auto-notes-alist}
may be used to automatically add text to the notes fields of the records
corresponding to certain messages.  The format of this alist is @refill

@example
(( @var{HEADER-NAME}
   (@var{REGEXP} . @var{STRING}) @dots{} )
    @dots{} )
@end example

@noindent
for example,

@example
(("To" ("-vm@@" . "VM mailing list"))
 ("Subject" ("sprocket" . "mail about sprockets")
            ("you bonehead" . "called me a bonehead")))
@end example

@noindent
will cause the text @code{"VM mailing list"} to be added to the notes field of
the record corresponding to anyone you get mail from via one of the @b{VM}
mailing lists.  If, that is, @code{bbdb/mail-auto-create-p} is set such
that the record would have been created, or if the record already
existed.@refill

The format of elements of this list may also be 

@example
(@var{REGEXP} @var{FIELD-NAME} @var{STRING})
@end example
@noindent
or
@example
(@var{REGEXP} @var{FIELD-NAME} @var{STRING} @var{REPLACE-P})
@end example

@noindent
meaning add the given string to the named field.  The field-name may not
be @samp{name}, @samp{aka}, @samp{address}, @samp{phone}, or @samp{net} 
(builtin fields) but must be either @samp{notes}, @samp{company}, or the
name of a user-defined note-field. @refill

@example
("pattern" . "string to add")
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to

@example
("pattern" notes "string to add")
@end example

@noindent
@var{STRING} can contain @code{\&} or @code{\N} escapes like in the function
@code{replace-match}.  For example, to automatically add the contents of the
@b{organization} field of a message to the @code{company} field of a @b{BBDB}
record, you can use this: @refill

@example
("Organization" (".*" company "\\&"))
@end example

@noindent
(Note you need two \ to get a single \ into a lisp string literal.)

If STRING is an integer @i{N}, the @i{N}th matching subexpression is
used, so the above example could be written more efficiently as @refill

@example
("Organization" (".*" company 0))
@end example

If STRING is neither a string or an integer, it should be a function
which is called with the contents of the field, and the result of the
function call is used.

If the @var{REPLACE-P} flag is true, then the string replaces the old
contents instead of being appended to it.

If multiple clauses match the message, all of the corresponding strings
will be added. @refill

If the string is being appended (@var{REPLACE-P} is false or not
provided) then the new string is appended to the end of the existing
field value, with an intervening newline.  So each piece of text
automatically added to this field will go on its own line. @refill

You can control what the separator is by putting a @code{field-separator}
property on the symbol naming the field.  For example, to make text
automatically added to a field named @code{newsgroups} be separated by
commas, you could do @refill

@example
(put 'newsgroups 'field-separator "; ")
@end example

This variable works for news as well.  You might want to arrange for 
this to have a different value when in mail as when in news. @refill

There may be only one entry per header in this alist: that is,@refill

@example
 (("Subject" ("\\bfoo\\b" . "Foo!!")
             ("bar" . "Bar!")))
@end example

@noindent
will work, but

@example
 (("Subject" ("\\bfoo\\b" . "Foo!!"))
  ("Subject" ("bar" . "Bar!")))
@end example

@noindent
will not.

Here's a more complicated example: some people include bitmaps of
themselves in their mail messages in an @b{X-Face:} header field.
You can capture this field into the @samp{*BBDB*} with the 
following:

@example
(setq bbdb-auto-notes-alist
      (append bbdb-auto-notes-alist
              (list "x-face"
                    (list (concat "[ \t\n]*\\([^ \t\n]*\\)"
                                  "\\([ \t\n]+\\([^ \t\n]+\\)\\)?"
                                  "\\([ \t\n]+\\([^ \t\n]+\\)\\)?"
                                  "\\([ \t\n]+\\([^ \t\n]+\\)\\)?"
                                  )
                          'face
                          "\\1\\3\\5\\7"))))
@end example

@noindent
(The calls to @code{list} and @code{concat} are just for readability, it
could easily be a constant.)  The tricky bit here is that it strips out
the newlines and whitespace used for header continuation, which are not
actually a part of the face data.  So though the mail message may have
the face data on multiple lines, the entry in the @samp{*BBDB*} will
be just one line.

@vindex bbdb-auto-notes-ignore
@code{bbdb-auto-notes-ignore} is an alist of headers and regexps to
ignore in @code{bbdb-auto-notes-hook}.  Each element looks like @refill

@example
(@var{HEADER} . @var{REGEXP})
@end example

@noindent
for example,

@example
("Organization" . "^Gatewayed from\\|^Source only")
@end example

@noindent
would exclude the phony @code{Organization:} headers in GNU mailing-lists
gatewayed to the @code{gnu.*} newsgroups.  Note that this exclusion
applies only to a single field, not to the entire message.  For that,
use the variable @code{bbdb-auto-notes-ignore-all}.

@vindex bbdb-auto-notes-ignore-all
@code{bbdb-auto-notes-ignore-all} is an alist of headers and regexps 
which cause the entire message to be ignored in @code{bbdb-auto-notes-hook}.
Each element looks like @refill

@example
(@var{HEADER} . @var{REGEXP})
@end example

@noindent
for example,

@example
("From" . "BLAT\\.COM")
@end example

@noindent
would exclude any notes recording for message coming from @code{BLAT.COM}.
@node The Mailing List, The Latest Version, Options, Top
@section The Mailing List

There is a mailing list for discussing @b{BBDB}: @samp{info-bbdb@@xemacs.org}.
To join, send mail to @samp{info-bbdb-request@@xemacs.org} (don't forget
the @samp{-request} part or you'll look silly in front of lots of people
who have the ability to remember it indefinitely...)
There has been a version change in the @b{BBDB} database file.  The date
There is also a second mailing list, to which only bug fixes and
new version announcements are sent; to be added to it, send mail 
to @samp{bbdb-announce-request@@xemacs.org}.  This is a very low volume list,
and if you're using @b{BBDB}, you really should be on it.
the database file} from the time of the older version's implementation.  It
When joining these lists or reporting bugs, please mention which version
you have.  You can find out with @kbd{M-x bbdb-version}.
in the @code{.bbdb} buffer, but will be stored internally in the new format.
@node The Latest Version, Todo List, The Mailing List, Top
@end itemize

The latest version is always available for anonymous FTP from 
@file{ftp.xemacs.org:/pub/bbdb/bbdb.tar.gz}.@refill

If you are on the @samp{bbdb-announce} mailing list, you will receive
patches as I release new versions.

@node Todo List, Thanks, The Latest Version, Top
@section Todo List
@c Anon-CVS: @code{cvs.xemacs.org}.  Use the following as the value for the CVS

@item 
Are there enough hooks?
@itemize @bullet
@item
Should notice when there are @samp{Reply-To:} addresses.@refill
@code{bbdb-create}, @code{bbdb-changed}, @code{bbdb}) courtesy of David
Bakhash.  (@code{<199801192104.QAA04399@@Bulgaria.MIT.edu>}
Should notice @samp{Real-Name:}, @samp{Full-Name:}, and
@samp{Senders-Name:} fields. @refill
name and the net address, as opposed to just completing the net
address.  See thread starting with
Should notice when there are @samp{Reply-To:} addresses.@refill

@item
Should have a command for merging together two divergent copies of
a @file{.bbdb} file (in case you read mail on one machine and news on
another, for instance.)@refill

@item
The @samp{*BBDB*} buffer should be resized to exactly fit what it's
displaying, even when not in ``electric'' mode.@refill

@item
It should be possible to do completion on last names as well as first
There should be better support for non-American addresses and phone
numbers.@refill
@item
@subsubheading Not-So-Near Future
BBDB should notice the addresses and/or subjects of @emph{outgoing} mail
as well.@refill
@itemize @bullet
@item
The interfaces should share more code. @refill

@item
Should reimplement ``electric'' mode to not be so broken.@refill

@item
Should notice phone numbers in .signatures (that shouldn't be hard;
noticing postal addresses is real hard, though.)@refill

@item
Should have a command to snarf in the addresses in the CC line, and to
search forward from point for an address and snarf that.@refill
@item
There should be better support for non-American addresses and phone
The @code{bbdb-create-internal} function should be more forgiving.@refill

@item
Should reimplement ``electric'' mode to not be so broken.@refill

@item
The @kbd{*C-o} keystroke should add a field to all displayed records.
@item
More @kbd{*} commands in general, including @kbd{*d}.
header data.
@item
The BBDB buffer is left at the top of the stack when GNUS is exited
because GNUS runs its exit-hooks too early.  This should be fixed.@refill
@end itemize
@item 
Should separate out the name and address namespaces.

@item
Everybody yell at Kyle until he adds @code{vm-select-message-hook}.

@item
This documentation should be written in NewSpeak.@refill

@item
@ifinfo
@node Thanks,, Todo List, Top
@end ifinfo
@end itemize

@node Thanks,  , , Top
@section Thanks


@subheading Thanks list for versions prior to and including 1.51.

And special thanks to Sebastian Kremer, Joe Wells, Todd Kaufmann, Andy
Norman, Ivan Vazquez, Stewart Clamen, Roland McGrath, Dave Brennan,
Kimball Collins, Dirk Grunwald, Philippe Queinnec, Boris Putanec, Dave
Disser, Francois Felix Ingrand, Sean Owens, Guido Bosch, Lance Brown,
Tom Emerson, George Hartzell, Luis Miguel Silveira, Kimmo Suominen,
@node _,,,(DIR)

@ifinfo
@node _,,,(dir)
@unnumbered _
@example
in.sid.i.ous aj   \in-'sid-e-*s\
   [L insidiosus, fr. insidiae ambush, fr. insidere to sit in, sit on, 
      fr. in- + sedere to sit -- more at SIT]
     1  a : awaiting a chance to entrap  TREACHEROUS
        b : harmful but enticing  SEDUCTIVE
     2  a : having a gradual and cumulative effect  SUBTLE
        b of a disease
          : developing so gradually as to be well established before
            becoming apparent
  in.sid.i.ous.ly av
  in.sid.i.ous.ness n
@end example



@menu
* Top::
@end menu

@end ifinfo

@node Concept Index, Variable Index,, Top
@node Variable Index,, Concept Index, Top
@printindex cp

@node Variable Index,  , Concept Index, Top
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr

@contents
@bye
